Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Cruz.
Almost with the publication of her first novel in 1976, C.J. Cherry became one of the most popular science fiction writers working today.
That first novel was Gait of Ivril.
Cherry added two more books to make it a trilogy, Well of Shu'an and Fires of Azeroth.
And for Well of Shu'an, she was given the John W. Campbell Award as the best new writer of the year.
Cherry has published some 15 novels since 1976, a very quick pace.
Some of her better known books include The Fated Sun trilogy, Brothers of Earth, Down Below Station, The Pride of Channer, and Hunter of Worlds.
In 1978, she won a Hugo Award for the short story Cassandra.
We asked Cherry if she'd been reading science fiction since childhood.
Yes, I started reading science fiction, I suppose, about the earliest form of literature that I read.
I never made a mental distinction between science fiction, fantasy, anything of that nature.
Because my parents brought it to me to read, and I just simply regarded it as the most interesting reading material that I had accessible.
So naturally, when I began turning to writing, that's what I wrote.
She went on to tell us why she decided to start writing science fiction.
Actually, they took my television program off the air.
Our television, at that time, I was ten.
Television hadn't been around in private homes very long.
I had just time enough to get thoroughly addicted to television science fiction, and then it ran its course, and it was gone from the air.
So I, in a fit of mourning, went into the bedroom, picked up a tablet and pencil, and started writing my own novels.
Cherry is a talented writer with a flair for style and structure.
She might have been successful in any form of writing she chose to pursue.
She tells us why she didn't write other kinds of books.
I didn't write the other things because I didn't like them.
In general, I find that the only thing outside of science fiction that I've ever tried in my hand at writing has been mysteries.
I don't care for the modern fashion of those, and I've always viewed them as a great deal more fun to read than they are to write,
mostly because you have to be extremely controlled, and I suspect that mystery writers have to know who did it.
And I'd rather not know the end of my books.
The other thing that I've tried my hand at is historical fiction, and I find, again, that's a straight jacket,
because you're rather well-held with what's happened, whether or not it makes artistic sense.
So, just for the sheer pleasure of writing, I prefer science fiction.
Donald Walheim, the owner and editor of Daw Books, discovered Cherry when she sent him the manuscript for Gate of Iverale.
She explains why she picked Walheim.
I grew fascinated with Walheim as an editor because I had gone through my library finally after seven years of trying to sell things,
and I thought, well, there must be a system to this.
You see, I had no professional help at all.
And I began searching my library to see what editor had published,
the majority of works and writers that I liked, figuring that we might have something in common as far as taste goes.
So I began researching Donald Walheim to see what his preferences were, where we differed and where we were similar.
And so I began to conclude more and more that we were fairly well syntactical when it came to taste.
Not quite the same all the way down the line, but generally there's a broad area of overlap.
So I found it very easy to work with.
We'll have more with C.J. Cherry next time.
I'm not sure if you can hear me, but I'm going to try to get to the bottom of it.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
C.J. Cherry published her first novel, Gate of Evrel, in 1976.
It was well received. Cherry quickly built up a following of readers and was acknowledged as one of the best new writers around.
The popularity of Gate of Evrel was one reason Cherry wrote two others on the same subject to form a trilogy.
The second book was Well if She Won, and the third, Fires of Azeroth.
The trilogy is exciting heroic fantasy that takes place on an alien world.
There are two main characters, Morgaine, a beautiful woman who wields a magic sword, and Vanya, a man who is vowed to help her in a difficult task.
Morgaine's task is to destroy a space-time gate left on Vanya's world.
The gate is a still-functioning artifact left by a vanished race, the call.
The gate can be used to travel in time or space, transporting anyone who enters it to other places and times.
But the gate and others like it on other planets is a danger to the universe.
That sounds like science fiction, but it's not.
The story occurs on a primitive planet with no technology.
Vanya and his people regard the gate as an object of magic and superstitiously avoid it.
They also consider Morgaine as an evil sorceress.
Her knowledge of technology to them is simply mysterious magic.
So the novel is fantasy. The fighting is done with swords and transportation is by horse.
Much of Cherry's later writing is straight science fiction, with a large amount of hard science in it.
We asked her why she started out with fantasy.
Well, I didn't.
They weren't the first books that I had written.
There are others which are...
...attentive efforts that didn't tan out in one way or another.
I won't say everybody, but a majority of writers tend to have them.
My first love is really technology.
The only thing is that I had been out of the technological mainstream while they had made numerous scientific advances that I was not current with.
It annoys me a great deal to feel that I'm writing something that is not technically accurate.
Or that I have glossed over something.
It irritates me personally to postulate, well, for instance, we have a gravity field here which keeps everyone's feet on the deck.
I want to know how it works.
Consequently, I wrote Heroic Fantasy while I was doing a great deal of reading in Scientific American.
Also, Heroic Fantasy is an area where I have a good deal of expertise since I have a major in classics, history, archeology, anthropology, this sort of thing.
But I had always been a sort of a hobbyist in the...
...a little more than a hobbyist since it was one of my fields in the history of technology.
Throughout the three books, we learn very little about the background of Morgane.
We ask Jerry if perhaps Morgane is a force or a creature who existed even before the call, the builders of the gates.
Well, actually, there's some of this that I'm not about to give away as regards to the history of Morgane,
because that it gets into the possibility of a book that I'm working on at the moment.
The first set of the books, the gate books, involve much more the character of Vanya, who is a medieval man.
I have to take his viewpoint, or they cease to be Heroic Fantasy, and they begin to be a science fiction novel, pure and simple,
because Morgane is far more technologically sophisticated than he is, and if it were told from her viewpoint, it would begin to be a thing of numbers and calculus.
Morgane is far more advanced, exactly where she comes from, and what she is, I've deferred to leave to the reader's estimation,
although I will say that your surmises are fairly well down the center.
We'll talk with CJ Cherry about some of her other books next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Cruz.
CJ Cherry's 1982 novel, The Pride of Channer, is a fascinating depiction of alien cultures.
Essentially, there's only one human in the entire book, a wretched man named Tully, who's been picked up after an accident aboard his spaceship.
The aliens who end up with him are called The Honey. We are with The Honey for the length of the novel, seeing everything from their alien perspective.
The Honey look and act like lions. We asked Cherry if this was deliberate.
Yes, absolutely. This is one case where I've taken the species of lions and in a very simple way devised a culture of an advanced species,
which very closely parallels the biology and, if you will, social patterns of a lion's ride.
The title of the book's course is a three-way pun.
As an alert reader soon figures out, there is a three-way pun on the title The Pride of Channer.
Pride of Lions? The Pride characteristic of the Honey species? In the name of the Honey spaceship, which is called The Pride of Channer.
Tully, the human who falls into Honey hands and gets mixed up in an interstellar war, is a pitiful creature who both fears and needs the Honey.
Cherry explains why he instinctively fears the lion-like species.
Have you ever seen a baboon react to a leopard? It's raw terror.
The primate nervous system is not really set up to be setting in the center of a pride of lions.
It's really one of the most unkind things I believe that you could do to a human being as far as social patterns would be to drop them right into the middle of a feline culture.
Because the moves are all wrong.
Well, for instance, Tully being the primate smiles.
And of course, this is exactly the wrong thing to do. You know what a lion does when it smiles. It's not a friendly gesture.
Every gesture he makes is wrong.
In his own way though, Cherry says, Tully acts with courage.
He is, however, a very heroic human being if you just simply analyze what he has done.
He has managed to survive a very horrendous situation.
He has managed to collect himself with some dignity out of a situation which we are not sure is the right thing to do.
If he had actually broken drastically, any average individual would have definitely come out of it damaged.
He's been forced to take horrendous decisions and he's been dumped into a situation where even his personal value is of some question.
And yet he manages to stand up on his signed feet and confront the honey captain with a, here I am, come and see if you can do something about it kind of attitude,
which is of course what wins the captain's respect in the beginning.
He calms down a little bit as you will see when he begins trying to deal with and doing what any sensible person would do when confronted with a situation where you suspect that the beings around you are at least essentially friendly
and there's no need to provoke something that would be a total misunderstanding.
So he does remain a little bit quiet but he's quiet partially because he's smart and is trying to absorb more data than he gets out.
The Pride of Channer is a typical CJ Cherry narrative, well-plotted with finely drawn alien cultures and full of exciting and realistic space battles.
And that's what we come to expect from Cherry. She doesn't seem to know how to write a bad book.
More with CJ Cherry on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
One of the finest science fiction trilogies in recent years is CJ Cherry's Fated Sun series.
It was published in the late 1970s under the titles Kesrith, Changer and Kutoth.
There are few books in science fiction that present an alien culture with the sensitivity and depth that Cherry has given to one of the alien races in the trilogy, the Marie.
The Marie are nomadic tribesmen of the desert. They are great warriors and space-faring races employ them as mercenaries.
Cherry says she didn't pattern the Marie on any modern nomadic cultures, but she used her knowledge of ancient history.
When I did the Fated Sun novels, which are basically a desert culture, I did not pattern it off any modern desert culture about which I know, frankly, nothing.
I patterned it strictly by taking what I know about desert survival.
And earlier nomadic cultures here on earth contrived a biology that would work under the extreme conditions that I postulated, and then drew elements from here and there.
It's very strange that I now get letters from people that say that it very closely resembles a modern terrestrial nomadic culture.
But this is strictly a surprise to me. I suppose it just says that I knew something about the very ancient one.
We asked Cherry what she most admired about the Marie.
I think that for one thing, about the Marie, I think I admire their steadfastness, their ability to face time itself with tranquility,
in the sense that they can take the long view, which is a thing that is absolutely necessary in my mind for civilized survival.
Mind, I don't say just survival, but civilized survival.
Is there ability to look down the centuries and see consequences?
The Marie sense of time is a very strange thing.
The Marie always lives now, and that now is a composite of the past, current events, and the future simultaneously.
They do not view time as the modern American does, which is more or less a set of beads on the string that we can snip off any tail of the string that seems inconvenient to us.
The Marie concept of the universe is holistic.
The Marie have almost been wiped out because they've been used as pawns in an interstellar war between humans and another alien culture, the Regal.
Duncan, a human who's been partly responsible for the Marie's seemingly certain demise, is conscious stricken at the possible end of such a beautiful and ancient culture.
His solution is to attempt to become a Marie, although it may kill him and will certainly destroy his humanity.
His final sacrifice in a sort of a redemptive sense is that he finally agrees that he will no longer attempt to be human.
That he begins to try to be something else.
Even in that there is a considerable hazard, because if the transition is not complete, he may end up contaminating the culture, which to the Marie and their way of life is a very, very serious thing.
But it is a voluntary and conscious decision that is effectively at his personal suicide.
And he takes it because he feels responsible for what has happened.
Duncan's attempt to become a Marie is one of the most sensitive treatments of human-alien contact in science fiction.
We'll have more with C.J. Cherry on our next program.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Cruz.
Hunter of Worlds, a 1977 novel by C.J. Cherry, is a different sort of science fiction book, a difficult one that surprised a few of its readers.
Cherry has created a language for one of the alien cultures in the novel, and the narrative is sprinkled with strange words that slow a reader down.
Cherry admits that Hunter of Worlds is different from other works.
Hunter of Worlds is constructed for different reasons.
Usually when I use alien languages in a book, it is not for local color.
It's just that when you run across anybody's civilization, which is vastly different than your own, you're going to come across three or four words which cannot be translated, no matter how you would like to.
It's just that not all languages have words for concepts, well, like in English, you can take several things that you can say, that you can't say in French and vice versa, which is why language borrows words from other languages.
When I did Hunter of Worlds, I was doing something totally different, and it is an experimental novel, and it is not a novel that I recommend to someone who is not used to science fiction or not used to language one or the other.
Basically on that one, the very premise of the book is linguistics, treating the science of linguistics as you will as seriously as you treat physics in a science fiction novel.
I deliberately set out to make a language which is not based on any earthly model. I even changed the rules of grammar to something that as far as I know is not directly based on any grammatical system on the face of the earth.
The thing is explained in an appendix in the back for people who wish to do this kind of thing.
Cherry has some advice for those who read the novel.
The trouble with the book is that of course at several points he is vastly mistaken about what he thinks he understands.
The book does have some pitfalls in it for somebody who is accustomed to believing everything that the hero in a novel believes must ergo be the truth.
Because he is very, very frequently mistaken or very, very frequently picks up a concept which is not the whole concept and gradually begins to arrive at an understanding of what's going on toward the end of the book.
Cherry says she has a special affection for the novel.
Many editors would have come and said, well yes but no one will understand those words. You've got to change them to English and that would have defeated the entire purpose of the book.
And that one is sort of one of the very, very strange books that I can reread and find something I didn't know was that.
Which is kind of an odd feeling.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.